---
title: "Machine Learning in Biotech: Fundamentals"
date: 2024-07-22T15:48:00
draft: true
author: "Divya Ramamoorthy"
tags:
  - machine learning
  - linear regression
image: /images/primer_1_header.png
description: ""
toc:
---
## Introduction

There is a lot of excitement around machine learning right now – but what does it mean, and how can it be used in biotech? I’ve been holding a machine learning primer series for my workplace where I cover core machine learning principles for a non-computational audience.

There are several areas in biotechnology where machine learning is being leveraged:

1. **Designing novel molecules:** One of machine learning’s strengths is its capacity to ingest large amounts of data, recognize consistent patterns, and recombine these patterns to design novel results. This year, we’ve seen a growth in using this type of machine learning to help scientists design new therapeutic molecules. Scientists can ingest large databases of proteins, train models that can capture important features, and then generate large numbers of novel proteins for downstream testing.
2. **Personalized medicine:** Medicine has advanced in its understanding of complex diseases, enabling us to break down diseases into subtypes. For example, better understanding cancers has allowed us to break down a general ‘breast cancer’ diagnosis into subtypes like ‘triple-negative breast cancer’ or ‘HER2+ breast cancer’, each of which has different treatments. From large biological datasets, it can be difficult for humans to identify which signals differentiate disease subtypes though. Machine learning methods can be used to sift through many different markers to identify what types of subtypes exist and what markers may define them.
3. **Systems biology:** We’re in the age of big biological data – with the ability to generate large volumes of measurements on DNA, RNA, and protein in our cells. Machine learning models are being used to help us understand the networks of how these molecules interact in cells, helping us better build hypotheses around biological mechanisms that drive our cells.
4. **Biodiversity mining:** The field has developed large libraries of molecules, but it can be cost-prohibitive to experimentally test millions of molecules to find the one or two that will work for a new disease. Machine learning can be used to predict the efficacies of molecules, enabling scientists to significantly cut down the number of molecules they may need to test, and helping them get to a drug faster.
5. **Clinical care:** One of the first uses of machine learning in biotech was for medical imaging analysis – seeing if we can train models to learn abnormalities in medical images (like the presence of a tumor). These can serve as a tool to give more information to doctors when they’re making medical decisions. Caution – there’s still significant work to be done on making sure that clinical machine learning is cognizant of its biases that could disproportionally affect different patient populations.

Interested in learning more about how machine learning works under the hood? Lesson 1 is on machine learning basics and linear regression. The recording can be found below.

## Learning Objectives

- Describe the difference between artificial intelligence, machine learning, and deep learning.
- Compare and contrast supervised and unsupervised machine learning.
- Define a linear regression model – including model parameters, optimization, and evaluation.
